Memory consolidation (#5149)
langchain-ai/langgraph: docs/docs/concepts/memory.md

# Memory

> Memory is a system that remembers something about previous interactions. This can be crucial for building a good agent experience. As AI agents undertake more complex tasks involving numerous user interactions, equipping them with memory becomes equally crucial for efficiency and user satisfaction. With memory, agents can learn from feedback and adapt to users' preferences. This guide covers two types of memory based on recall scope:

Reviewer: Found this a bit confusing. I feel like we want to get to the point about learning a user's preferences sooner...

Wonder if we want to use admonitions for definitions, something like abstract or info [here](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/#+type:abstract).

```suggestion
Memory is a system that remembers information about previous interactions. For AI agents, memory is crucial because it lets them remember previous interactions, learn from feedback, and adapt to user preferences. As agents tackle more complex tasks with numerous user interactions, this capability becomes essential for both efficiency and user satisfaction. This guide covers two types of memory, based on their recall scope:
```

- [Short-term memory](#short-term-memory), or [thread](persistence.md#threads)-scoped memory, tracks the ongoing conversation by maintaining message history within a session. LangGraph manages short-term memory as a part of your agent's [state](low_level.md#state). State is persisted to a database using a [checkpointer](persistence.md#checkpoints) so the thread can be resumed at any time. Short-term memory updates when the graph is invoked or a step is completed, and the State is read at the start of each step.

- [Long-term memory](#long-term-memory) stores user-specific or application-level data across sessions and is shared _across_ conversational threads. It can be recalled _at any time_ and _in any thread_. Memories are scoped to any custom namespace, not just within a single thread ID. LangGraph provides [stores](persistence.md#memory-store) ([reference doc](https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/reference/store/#langgraph.store.base.BaseStore)) to let you save and recall long-term memories.

![](img/memory/short-vs-long.png)

For information on how to add memory to your application, see the [Memory](../how-tos/memory/add-memory.md) guide.

## Short-term memory

> Short-term memory lets your application remember previous interactions within a single [thread](persistence.md#threads) or conversation. A [thread](persistence.md#threads) organizes multiple interactions in a session, similar to the way email groups messages in a single conversation.

Reviewer: Another opportunity for maybe a definition admonition, more engaging?

Author: I inlined these links better/sooner. Generally, I like to reserve admonitions for important warnings, tips, etc. I think they are currently overused in our docs 😬

Reviewer: Sounds good!

```python
from langchain_core.messages import trim_messages
trim_messages(
    messages,
    # Keep the last <= n_count tokens of the messages.
    strategy="last",
    # Remember to adjust based on your model
    # or else pass a custom token_encoder
    token_counter=ChatOpenAI(model="gpt-4"),
    # Remember to adjust based on the desired conversation
    # length
    max_tokens=45,
    # Most chat models expect that chat history starts with either:
    # (1) a HumanMessage or
    # (2) a SystemMessage followed by a HumanMessage
    start_on="human",
    # Most chat models expect that chat history ends with either:
    # (1) a HumanMessage or
    # (2) a ToolMessage
    end_on=("human", "tool"),
    # Usually, we want to keep the SystemMessage
    # if it's present in the original history.
    # The SystemMessage has special instructions for the model.
    include_system=True,

> )

Reviewer: Might be good to use the annotations here instead, but just my personal pref
